.. _coordinates:

Coordinates
===========

*Parthenon currently provides a coordinates class ``UniformCartesian``
for a uniform Cartesian coordinate system. In the near future we will
provide uniform spherical and uniform cylindrical coordinate systems.
Other coordinate systems may be implemented in downstream codes.
Alternatively, coordinate systems can be incorporated in the fluid
equations such as is done
in*\ `Phoebus <https://github.com/lanl/phoebus>`__\ *.*

Coordinate objects under the ``Coordinates_t`` type are created for each
meshblock. Coordinate information such as positions of different
elements within each cell (cell centers, face centers, edge centers, and
nodes), distance between elements, and integration elements (cell
widths, edge centers, face areas, and cell volumes) can be accessed from
the coordinate object for each meshblock. The coordinates object for
meshblock ``b`` in a variable pack ``var_pack`` can be accessed via
``var_pack.GetCoords(b)``.

The interface for coordinate systems is derived from Athena++ but with
new names and with directions, faces, and edges specified by either
template parameters at compile time or arguments at run time instead of
with different function names. For ease of conversion from Athena++, we
summarize the new coordinate functions with their Athena++ predecessors.

Position of elements (replacing ``x1v``, ``x1f``, ``x1s2`` etc. in
Athena++)

::

   Xc<int dir>(const int idx); //Cell Centers
   Xf<int face, int dir>(const int idx); //Face Centers
   Xe<int edge, int dir>(const int idx); //Edge Centers
   Xn< int dir>(const int idx); //Cell Nodes

where ``1<=dir<=3`` is which component of the direction being queried
(i.e. x,y,z), ``face`` and ``edge`` specify which face/edge is being
queried, and ``idx`` is the index along ``dir``. For the function
``Xf``, when ``dir==face`` it gives the same face position as ``x1f``,
``x2f``, and ``x3f`` in Athena++. When ``dir!=face``, it returns the
face-average position, lying within the plane of the face, which
replaces ``x1s2``, ``x1s3``, ``x2s1``, ``x2s3``, ``x3s1``, and ``x3s2``
in Athena++. ``Xe`` and ``Xn`` have no equivalents in Athena++ put
return the positions of off-cell-center locations consistent with these
positions computed from cell-centers and face-centers in Athena++.

Distance between elements (previously ``dx1v``, ``dx1f`` etc. )

::

   Dxc<int dir>(const int idx); //Distance between cell centers along dir
   Dxf<int dir, int face>(const int idx); //Distance between face centers along dir
   Dxe<int dir, int edge>(const int idx); //Distance between edge centers along dir
   Dxn< int dir>(const int idx); //Distance between cell Nodes along dir

Likewise, ``face``, ``edge``, ``Dxe``, and ``Dxn`` are new to get
distances between different elements along different dimensions.

Integration elements (replacing ``CenterWidth1``, ``Edge1Length``,
``Face1Area``, and ``CellVolume``)

::

   CellWidth<int dir>( const int k, const int j, const int i); //Cell Width at cell center
   FaceArea<int face>( const int k, const int j, const int i); //Area of Face
   EdgeLength<int edge>( const int k, const int j, const int i); //Length of edge
   CellVolume( const int k, const int j, const int i); //CellVolume

These functions take all three indices to accommodate extension to
spherical and cylindrical.

Compile Time vs. Run Time Parameters
------------------------------------

For each of these functions that take parameters ``dir``, ``face``,
and/or ``edge`` as template parameters at compile time, we also
introduce as needed versions with runtime parameters appending ``FA`` to
the function name for “function-arguments.” For example,

::

   FaceAreaFA( const int dir, const int k, const int j, const int i); //Face Areas

This convention avoids naming conflicts between simplified functions and
runtime functions. These run-time versions are implemented on an
as-needed basis.

*This page will be expanded with the implementation of spherical and
cylindrical coordinates.*
