docs/interface/Metadata.md, before:

# Anonymous Variables

## Metadata

Variables can be tagged with a variety of `MetadataFlag` values. These flags
primarily allow an application to tell Parthenon to apply certain behaviors to
each field.

### Dependency Management

Several packages may add variables of the same name. These metadata
flags tell `Parthenon` how to resolve conflicts.

- `Private`: private metadata means a variable is package
  specific. The package name is prepended to the variable name, like a
  namespace. Two different variables can have the same name if they
  live in different packages.
- `Provides`: variables with this metadata are shared, and demand they
  be the only ones to provide a variable. The metadata of these
  variables takes priority. If two packages provide the same variable
  with the Provides metadata, an error is raised at runtime. Provides
  is on by default unless overriden by another flag.
- `Requires`: variables with this metadata flag are not added by a
  package. The package simply declares it expects the variable to
  exist and if it doesn't, an error is raised.
- `Overridable`: Variables with this metadata flag are provided by the
  package that registers them unless another package provides said
  variable (with the Provides flag), in which case, that other package
  determines what happens to that variable. If two packages request an
  Overridable variable, but it is not provided, it's undefined
  behaviour and Parthenon warns as such.

### Variable Topology

Topology essentially specifies on which place on the finite volume
grid the variable is defined. These fields specify what index space
the variable is allocated over. E.g.  `Metadata::Cell` specifies that
the variable is allocated over the cell index space in each block.

The following fields specify the topology of the variable, and are
mutually exclusive:

- `Metadata::None`: no topology specified. The variable could be
  anywhere, or location is not a meaningful concept for this variable.
- `Metadata::Cell`: The variable is defined on cell centers. The
  variable is likely volume-averaged.
- `Metadata::Face`: The variable is defined on cell faces. The
  variable is likely area-averaged.
- `Metadata::Edge`: The variable is defined on cell edges. The
  variable is likely length-averaged.
- `Metadata::Node`: The variable is defined at nodes, i.e.,
  cell-corners. The variable might be volume-averaged, or defined
  pointwise.

### Variable Behaviors

These flags can be used to tell an application code how to treat a
variable in relation to the problem.

- `Metadata::Advected` implies a variable is advected with the flow of
  another variable, e.g., a velocity.
- `Metadata::Conserved` implies a variable obeys a conservation law.
- `Metadata::Intensive` implies that the value of a variable does not
  scale with volume.
- `Metadata::Sparse` implies that the variable is sparse and hence it
  may not be allocated on all blocks.

### Output

These flags specify how a variable interacts with I/O. Enable them to
enable output properties.

- `Metadata::Restart` implies a variable is required in restart files

### Tensor properties and boundaries

For multidimensional variables, these flags specify how to treat the
individual components at boundaries. For concreteness, we will discuss
reflecting boundaries. But this may apply more broadly. A variable
with no flag set is assumed to be a *Scalar*. Scalars obey
[Dirichlet boundary conditions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirichlet_boundary_condition)
at reflecting boundaries and are set to a constant value.
The following flags are mutually exclusive.

- `Metadata::Vector` implies the variable transforms as a *vector* at
  reflecting boundaries. And so i-th component is flipped for a
  boundary in the i-th direction.
- `Metadata::Tensor` is the generalization of the vector boundary
  condition, but for tensor quantities.

### Independent/Derived

These flags specify to an application code, and the infrastructure,
whether or not a variable is part of independent state. Derived
quantities can be calculated from the set of independent quantities,
while independent quantities cannot. The following flags are mutually
exclusive and required. All variables should be either independent or
derived.

- `Metadata::Independent` implies the variable is part of independent
  state. In particular, implies data is in restart files 
  and is prolongated/restricted during remeshing. 
  Buffers for a coarse grid are allocated for independent variables.
- `Metadata::Derived` implies the variable can be calculated, given
  the independent state. This is the default.

### Communication

These flags specify both how ghost zones are treated, and whether
variables are copied or not in multiple stages.

- `Metadata::OneCopy` are shared between stages. They are only ever
  allocated once.
- `Metadata::FillGhost` specifies that ghost zones for this variable
  must be filled via communication or boundary conditions. This is not
  always required. `OneCopy` variables, for example, may not need
  this.

### Ghost Zones, Communication, and Fluxes

Depending on a combination of flags, extra communication buffers and
classes may be allocated. The behaviours are the following:

- If `Metadata::FillGhosts` is set, boundary conditions data is set,
  MPI communication buffers are allocated, and buffers for a coarse
  grid are allocated. These buffers are *one-copy*, meaning they are
  shared between all instances of a variable in all `Containers` in a
  `DataCollection`.

- If `Metadata::WithFluxes` is set, the flux vector for the variable
  is allocated. Note that it is necessary to set both
  `Metadata::WithFluxes` and `Metadata::FillGhosts` to send flux
  corrections across meshblocks.

### Application Metadata Flags

Applications can allocate their own flags by calling
`Metadata::AllocateNewFlag("FlagName")`. For example:
```c++
using parthenon::Metadata;
using parthenon::MetadataFlag;

MetadataFlag const my_app_flag = Metadata::AllocateNewFlag("MyAppFlag");
```

These can be used in all the same contexts that the built-in metadata
flags are used. Parthenon will not interpret them in any way - it's up
to the application to interpret them.

Commit message:

Add `Metadata::RemeshComm` Flag (#732)
* Add RemeshComm metadata flag

* Remove range based for

* update copyright

* update changelog

* Format and lint

docs/interface/Metadata.md, after:

# Anonymous Variables

## Metadata

Variables can be tagged with a variety of `MetadataFlag` values. These flags
primarily allow an application to tell Parthenon to apply certain behaviors to
each field.

### Dependency Management

Several packages may add variables of the same name. These metadata
flags tell `Parthenon` how to resolve conflicts.

- `Private`: private metadata means a variable is package
  specific. The package name is prepended to the variable name, like a
  namespace. Two different variables can have the same name if they
  live in different packages.
- `Provides`: variables with this metadata are shared, and demand they
  be the only ones to provide a variable. The metadata of these
  variables takes priority. If two packages provide the same variable
  with the Provides metadata, an error is raised at runtime. Provides
  is on by default unless overriden by another flag.
- `Requires`: variables with this metadata flag are not added by a
  package. The package simply declares it expects the variable to
  exist and if it doesn't, an error is raised.
- `Overridable`: Variables with this metadata flag are provided by the
  package that registers them unless another package provides said
  variable (with the Provides flag), in which case, that other package
  determines what happens to that variable. If two packages request an
  Overridable variable, but it is not provided, it's undefined
  behaviour and Parthenon warns as such.

### Variable Topology

Topology essentially specifies on which place on the finite volume
grid the variable is defined. These fields specify what index space
the variable is allocated over. E.g.  `Metadata::Cell` specifies that
the variable is allocated over the cell index space in each block.

The following fields specify the topology of the variable, and are
mutually exclusive:

- `Metadata::None`: no topology specified. The variable could be
  anywhere, or location is not a meaningful concept for this variable.
- `Metadata::Cell`: The variable is defined on cell centers. The
  variable is likely volume-averaged.
- `Metadata::Face`: The variable is defined on cell faces. The
  variable is likely area-averaged.
- `Metadata::Edge`: The variable is defined on cell edges. The
  variable is likely length-averaged.
- `Metadata::Node`: The variable is defined at nodes, i.e.,
  cell-corners. The variable might be volume-averaged, or defined
  pointwise.

### Variable Behaviors

These flags can be used to tell an application code how to treat a
variable in relation to the problem.

- `Metadata::Advected` implies a variable is advected with the flow of
  another variable, e.g., a velocity.
- `Metadata::Conserved` implies a variable obeys a conservation law.
- `Metadata::Intensive` implies that the value of a variable does not
  scale with volume.
- `Metadata::Sparse` implies that the variable is sparse and hence it
  may not be allocated on all blocks.

### Output

These flags specify how a variable interacts with I/O. Enable them to
enable output properties.

- `Metadata::Restart` implies a variable is required in restart files

### Tensor properties and boundaries

For multidimensional variables, these flags specify how to treat the
individual components at boundaries. For concreteness, we will discuss
reflecting boundaries. But this may apply more broadly. A variable
with no flag set is assumed to be a *Scalar*. Scalars obey
[Dirichlet boundary conditions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirichlet_boundary_condition)
at reflecting boundaries and are set to a constant value.
The following flags are mutually exclusive.

- `Metadata::Vector` implies the variable transforms as a *vector* at
  reflecting boundaries. And so i-th component is flipped for a
  boundary in the i-th direction.
- `Metadata::Tensor` is the generalization of the vector boundary
  condition, but for tensor quantities.

### Independent/Derived

These flags specify to an application code, and the infrastructure,
whether or not a variable is part of independent state. Derived
quantities can be calculated from the set of independent quantities,
while independent quantities cannot. The following flags are mutually
exclusive and required. All variables should be either independent or
derived.

- `Metadata::Independent` implies the variable is part of independent
  state. In particular, implies data is in restart files 
  and is prolongated/restricted during remeshing. 
  Buffers for a coarse grid are allocated for independent variables.
- `Metadata::Derived` implies the variable can be calculated, given
  the independent state. This is the default.

### Communication

These flags specify both how ghost zones are treated, and whether
variables are copied or not in multiple stages.

- `Metadata::OneCopy` are shared between stages. They are only ever
  allocated once.
- `Metadata::FillGhost` specifies that ghost zones for this variable
  must be filled via communication or boundary conditions. This is not
  always required. `OneCopy` variables, for example, may not need
  this.

### Ghost Zones, Communication, and Fluxes

Depending on a combination of flags, extra communication buffers and
classes may be allocated. The behaviours are the following:

- If `Metadata::FillGhosts` is set, boundary conditions data is set,
  MPI communication buffers are allocated, and buffers for a coarse
  grid are allocated. These buffers are *one-copy*, meaning they are
  shared between all instances of a variable in all `Containers` in a
  `DataCollection`.

- If `Metadata::WithFluxes` is set, the flux vector for the variable
  is allocated. Note that it is necessary to set both
  `Metadata::WithFluxes` and `Metadata::FillGhosts` to send flux
  corrections across meshblocks.

- If `Metadata::ForceRemeshComm` is set, the variable is communicated between 
  ranks during remeshing. Variables with `Metadata::Independent` and/or 
  `Metadata::FillGhost` are also automatically communicated when a block 
  is communicated from one process to another. Other variables **are not** 
  communicated across ranks, since the Parthenon model assumes that all 
  fields are either `Independent` or `Derived` and that the `Derived` 
  fields can be reconstructed from only the `Independent` fields by calling 
  `FillDerived`. Nevertheless, it is sometimes useful to pass certain 
  `Derived` fields between ranks during remeshing rather than rebuild them 
  (e.g. the initial guesses for a root find that may converge slowly or not 
  at all without a good initial guess). *This flag should be used with 
  caution, since it has the possibility the possibility to mask errors in 
  the `FillDerived` implementation in downstream codes.*

### Application Metadata Flags

Applications can allocate their own flags by calling
`Metadata::AllocateNewFlag("FlagName")`. For example:
```c++
using parthenon::Metadata;
using parthenon::MetadataFlag;

MetadataFlag const my_app_flag = Metadata::AllocateNewFlag("MyAppFlag");
```

These can be used in all the same contexts that the built-in metadata
flags are used. Parthenon will not interpret them in any way - it's up
to the application to interpret them.
